So we've seen how with others we want to use this mood tense with the exception of positive
orders which are informal.
There we have a shortcut.
We can just cut off the S of the informal form.
For example, what is to wait?
Esperar.
And what is you wait informally?
Esperas.
And wait the order
Espera.
That's our shortcut.
How would you say let's wait?
Esperemos.
Good.
And you can also say esperamos.
It just sounds less like an order.
It would sound more like shall we wait?
Esperamos.
Shall we wait?
But then the order, Esperemos.
Let's not wait.
No esperemos.
Good.
So the orders we are using with you, the different versions of you, and with we.
But maybe I want to say what I want him to do or what I want her to do or what I want them
to do.
Other than the structures that we learned already, quiero, ke, prefiero, ke, etc.
We can just say ke and follow it with the subjunctive
So for example, maybe you tell me David is waiting for you, and I say, Quespere, Kespere
That he waits, but I'm using this mood tense.
So I'm saying let him wait.
Let him wait.
Maybe I really want the show to finish.
I want to show to hurry up and finish.
I can say ke it finishes in the mood tense and then I get that meaning of let it finish.
Hurry up and finish.
So how would I say that?
Let it finish.
We said that the word for already was ya and we can use that here.
So let it finish already.
Enough already.
We said that Kayarce was too quiet oneself or to shut up.
So maybe you want somebody to shut up, you're not angry enough to tell them directly.
Maybe you will just say, oh let them let him shut up.
Let him quiet himself.
How would that be?
Good.
Another situation that we use the mood tense in is when after the word quando we refer to the future.
For example, if I say when we speak, and I mean generally, how will it sound
Quando hablamos.
So this is generally when we speak generally and you could continue, no
But if you mean in a future event, when we speak later on, then you will use this
mood tense.
Now this is very interesting use of the mood tense because it highlights some kind of superstition maybe that the language is uncomfortable with referring
to something in the future that didn't happen yet as a fact.
So you're putting this mood tense there to kind of highlight that subjectivity
Give me when we speak then.
When we speak and we mean the future when we speak.
Cuando hablemos.
We are using this mood tense because we are referring to something that's going to happen in the future that we give it as a fact.
And it's like, who are we as mere mortals to do such a thing, to refer to this event or to this fact that will be?
So for example, you could say, when we eat together, we speak.
And you mean generally?
No?
When we eat together, we speak.
What was together?
Related to junction, related to joint?
Related to what in English they say military junta?
Junta.
So how would you say when we eat together, we speak.
When we eat together, we speak.
Junta is the version you found through military junta, but you're not just gonna take it, you're gonna have to process it as well.
When we eat together, juntas.
If you're two females, that's fine.
So cuando comemos juntas, we speak.
Good, all together.
When we eat together we speak.
Good.
So here you're speaking generally, generalmente.
Generally.
When we eat together, we speak.
But if you want to say when we eat together and you're referring to the future, a fact that you're naming that hasn't happened yet.
There you want to use your mood tense.
So let's work our way through it.
When we eat together and we're referring to the future
We will speak.
And we don't need will with we will speak.
because the when we eat together is a future context.
We can just go back to normal everyday present again.
Hablamos.
Good.
Cuando comamos juntas, two females.
When we eat together, hablamos.
We will speak.
Now hablamos is just normal present because it's not directly connected to quando and we have future context already, so we can just use ablamos.
So if we compare these two sentences, the only difference is in the mood tense.
This means generally.
I went back to male or mixed group.
Generally.
When we eat together we will speak.
What is I go or I'm going
Boy.
Now you could probably guess that the mood tense of boy and ban, bamos is irregular.
So the root is baya, V-A-Y-A, Baya, and then we add on our consonants if we need them.
So for example, the they form or the U plural form would be
Bayan.
We form.
Payamos.
Good.
So how would you say
We see her when we go.
And you're speaking generally.
We see her.
La vemos.
La vemos when we go, generally speaking.
Cuando vamos.
Good.
But if we want to say we will see her when we go, and we're referring to the future, not generally.
We will see her when we go.
How will that be?
So we will see her.
We can just use the present because when we go is the future context.
So again, how is we will see her
Lavemos.
Good.
When we go, and we refer now to the future with when we go.
So we have la vemos quando vamos generally la vemos quando vayamos in the future.